# China: manpower engaged in human monitoring

A. Dedicated political‑security professionals (core “political police”)

MSS (Ministry of State Security) – size is secret; credible public estimates run from the low hundreds of thousands up
to ~600,000 employees. (Example: former U.S. official James Lewis told 60 Minutes “as many as 600,000.”) China News

MPS Domestic Security Department (国保/DSD) – the MPS’ political‑security arm is present down to municipal level;
numbers are not public but the unit’s function and priority are well documented. For estimation below I treat DSD as a
share of MPS sworn police (see B). Leiden Asia Centre

B. Police & auxiliaries who do political monitoring as part of “stability maintenance” (维稳)

Sworn police (MPS) – China does not publish a current national figure; historical and expert references place it ~2
million today (1.43 million in 2003; commonly cited ~2 million now). 观察者网China Change

Rationale: 2003 MPS data showed 1.43m police; since then both population and police density rose, and academic work on
Chinese policing uses ~2m as an order‑of‑magnitude anchor. 观察者网Leiden Asia Centre

Auxiliary police (辅警) – para‑police on local payrolls. ≥1.2 million nationwide by end‑2024 (MPS data, reported);
several provinces cap auxiliaries at or below the number of sworn police, with some local ratios up to 1.5 auxiliaries
per officer. chinascope.org jxrd.jxnews.com.cn chinapeace.gov.cn

C. Full‑time neighborhood “grid” managers (网格员)

Grid workers – ~4.5 million nationwide, per the PRC Ministry of Justice (official). They staff 583,000 “comprehensive
governance centers” and act as eyes/ears for local Political‑Legal Committees. moj.gov.cn

Bringing it together (headcount ranges)

“Dedicated political‑security” (MSS + DSD): very uncertain; a defensible working range = 300k–900k (MSS 100k–600k + a
fraction of MPS assigned to DSD tasks). China News Leiden Asia Centre

Police & auxiliaries (part‑time political monitoring): ~3.2m (≈2.0m sworn + ≥1.2m auxiliaries), of whom only a share of
time is political/security monitoring. chinascope.org China Change

Neighborhood grid managers (full‑time monitoring): ~4.5m. moj.gov.cn

Order‑of‑magnitude takeaway: If you count the people whose primary job is feeding, doing, or coordinating
political/domestic surveillance (MSS + DSD + grid), you get ~5–9 million people (broad band because MSS and DSD
headcounts are opaque). If you also include sworn/auxiliary police time spent on 维稳 duties, the labor actually applied
to human monitoring on any given day plausibly sits well above 6 million FTEs (grid + dedicated units + a slice of
police/aux time). Anchor datapoint: The official 4.5 million grid workers alone make this an unusually
manpower‑intensive system by global standards. moj.gov.cn

China: what does this cost (wage bill and budget anchors)?

Because the central budget no longer itemizes all “domestic security” sub‑lines, I estimate a floor wage bill from units
where wages are observable, and check it against top‑down “public security” budget aggregates.

1. Bottom‑up “floor” wage bill (direct human monitoring)

Grid workers (~4.5m). Public postings show monthly base pay typically ¥2,200–¥3,700 (examples from Hubei, Beijing
Shunyi, Jinan). Annual wage bill ≈ ¥135–¥189 billion. China Change

Auxiliary police (≥1.2m, often 3,300–5,000 RMB/month; higher in some cities). Examples: ¥3,300–¥5,000 in
Guangdong/Jiangsu/Tianjin postings; Beijing positions approach ¥80k–97k/yr packages. Annual wage bill = ¥48–¥120+
billion at 1.2m auxiliaries (larger if closer to 2m). Sohu +1 blog.sina.com.cn

MSS + MPS/DSD cadre. No open wage data; as an illustrative bracket, if 300k–900k personnel average ¥120k–¥180k/yr,
that’s ¥36–¥162 billion in salaries. (This is a scenario calculation, not an official figure.) Leiden Asia Centre China
News

→ Conservative “floor” for wages directly tied to human monitoring labor: ~¥230–¥470 billion per year (grid +
auxiliaries + plausible band for MSS/DSD), before employer social contributions, housing funds, training, overhead, and
equipment.

2. Top‑down cross‑check (domestic security budgets)

PRC “public security” (domestic) spending across all levels reached ¥702bn (2012) and ¥769bn (2013), and by 2016
exceeded ¥1 trillion, outpacing defense that year. Later budgets became harder to disaggregate publicly, but the level
remaining ≥¥1T from the mid‑2010s is well documented. Reuters Quartz Business Insider Jamestown

Interpretation. If total public‑security outlays have been ≥¥1 trillion annually since 2016, a ¥230–¥470bn wage‑only
floor for the political‑monitoring labor component is plausible and likely conservative, because it excludes many sworn
police salaries (outside DSD time) and non‑wage costs. On the other hand, not all “public security” spend is political
surveillance (it also funds ordinary policing, courts/jails in some classifications, etc.). Jamestown

Why tech hasn’t displaced people (the Xinjiang micro‑case)

During the Xinjiang security surge, authorities added >90,000 police in 2016–2017 and rolled out 7,300+ checkpoints,
even as high‑tech systems expanded—clear evidence that technology scaled with headcount, not in place of it. Wikipedia

Cross‑country comparisons (how “manpower‑heavy” is China?)

Key idea: China stands out not just for the size of its professional security services but for its massive
neighborhood‑level human network (grid management) devoted to surveillance and early warning.

Country / systemCore domestic‑intelligence staffAuxiliary / neighborhood “watchers”Spend / notes ChinaMSS: est.
100k–600k; MPS/DSD embedded nationwideGrid workers ~4.5m; Aux. police ≥1.2m (regulatory caps allow more; some locales up
to 1.5:1 aux:sworn)Public security spend ≥¥1T since 2016; grid wages alone ~¥135–¥189bn/yr. China News moj.gov.cn
chinascope.org chinapeace.gov.cn Jamestown

United StatesFBI total positions ~37,000 (domestic intel/counterintelligence plus criminal)No national grid; “fusion
centers” exist but are small; local police not politically taskedFBI FY2025 budget ~$11.3B request. Federal Bureau of
Investigation

United KingdomMI5 “over 5,000 staff”No mass neighborhood surveillance corpsUK intelligence funding via Single
Intelligence Account (MI5/SIS/GCHQ); budget totals published but not MI5‑only. MI5 GOV.UK

RussiaFSB numbers opaque; Rosgvardia ~340,000 internal troopsSome volunteer formations, but no nationwide “grid”Police
staffing shortfalls ~172,000 recently signal overall scale; Rosgvardia underscores paramilitary role. The Moscow Times
Wall Street Journal

VietnamMPS domestic security organs; sizes not public“Semi‑specialized force” reportedly ~2,000,000 local security
collaboratorsIllustrates a PRC‑style community‑surveillance model in another one‑party state. Wikipedia

CubaSmall professional state securityCDR neighborhood committees ~8 million members (on paper; participation
varies)Longstanding model of mass citizen surveillance; largely volunteer. Wikipedia

North KoreaState Security & Social Security Ministries; 140k–210k public security personnelUniversal inminban units
(20–40 households each)The archetype of human‑mesh surveillance. Wikipedia 38 North

What the table shows: Democracies concentrate domestic‑intelligence manpower in small professional agencies (thousands
to tens of thousands). Authoritarian systems add or prioritize mass neighborhood networks (millions) to observe and feed
information—China’s grid (~4.5m) is the standout contemporary example. moj.gov.cn

How I computed China’s cost & manpower (at a glance)

Count what’s published: Grid workers 4.5m (official). Auxiliaries ≥1.2m (MPS data reported). Sworn police ~2.0m
(historical/academic anchoring). MSS unknown → use a range tied to credible public estimates. moj.gov.cn
chinascope.org观察者网China Change China News

Wage floor from postings: Grid ¥2.2–3.7k/month, Aux ~¥3.3–5.0k/month (higher in Tier‑1 cities). Multiply by headcount
× 12. (This excludes social insurance, overtime, uniforms, vehicles, training.) Sohu blog.sina.com.cn

Cross‑check against the macro budget: PRC public‑security spend ≥¥1T since 2016—comfortably above the wage floor for
monitoring labor, with room for overhead and technology. Jamestown

Uncertainty & what would most change the estimate

MSS/DSD headcount and pay are the biggest missing pieces. A credible leak or MOF functional‑line breakout would tighten
the range substantially. Leiden Asia Centre

Auxiliary police totals: MPS has acknowledged ≥1.2m; several provinces’ caps imply a theoretical upper bound near parity
with sworn police (or higher). If auxiliaries are closer to 2–3m nationwide—as some local ratios suggest—the wage bill
rises by ¥50–180bn. chinascope.org jxrd.jxnews.com.cn chinapeace.gov.cn

Grid‑worker pay varies with locality; moving the national median by ±¥500/month shifts the wage bill by about ±¥27bn.

Bottom line

Manpower applied to human monitoring in China is measured in the millions—~5–9 million if you count MSS/DSD and the
nationwide grid alone, and >6 million FTEs when you account for police/auxiliary time on 维稳. The unique driver is the
grid management system (网格化治理), not technology. moj.gov.cn

Annual labor cost for this monitoring—even on a conservative wage‑only basis—is likely in the low hundreds of billions
of RMB (≈¥230–¥470bn), and plausibly higher once you include social charges and overhead embedded in the broader ≥¥1T
public‑security outlays. Jamestown

Compared with peers, China’s system relies far more on mass human networks than on a compact professional cadre—closer
in spirit to Cuba’s CDRs or Vietnam’s local security collaborators than to the FBI/MI5 model in democracies. Wikipedia
+1 Federal Bureau of Investigation MI5

Sources (selected)

PRC Ministry of Justice: 4.5 million grid workers, 583k governance centers. moj.gov.cn

Reuters & Jamestown on domestic security budgets (¥700–770bn in 2012–13; >¥1T by 2016). Reuters Business Insider
Jamestown

60 Minutes interview citing MSS up to ~600k. China News

Historical and expert anchors on police numbers (1.43m in 2003; ~2m commonly cited today). 观察者网China Change

Official/press postings on grid and auxiliary wages (Hubei case ~¥2,200/mo; Jinan ~¥3,700/mo; Beijing aux up to
~¥80–97k/yr; Tianjin/Guangdong ~¥3,300–¥5,000/mo). Sohu +1 blog.sina.com.cn

Xinjiang surge (>90k police recruited 2016–17) showing manpower intensification alongside tech. Wikipedia

Comparators: FBI staffing/budget; MI5 staff; Rosgvardia size & Russian police staffing shortfall; Vietnam MPS
“semi‑specialized force” ~2m; Cuba CDR ~8m; North Korea inminban and police. Federal Bureau of Investigation MI5 The
Moscow Times Wall Street Journal Wikipedia +2 Wikipedia +2 38 North
